OBSDOCS-174 - Loki Aware Data Replication (#67358)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/logging-loki-zone-fail-recovery.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * logging/cluster-logging-loki.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="logging-loki-zone-fail-recovery_{context}"]
= Recovering Loki pods from failed zones

> In  {product-title} a zone failure happens when specific availability zone resources become inaccessible. Availability zones are isolated areas within a cloud provider's data center, aimed at enhancing redundancy and fault tolerance. If your cluster isn't configured to handle this, a zone failure can lead to service or data loss.

Reviewer: We should be precise on which cluster we mean with this sentence. I believe you mean OCP cluster here, right?

```
If your cluster isn't configured to handle this, a zone failure can lead to service or data loss.
```

> These pods are part of a link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/[StatefulSet], and they come with Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs) provisioned by a `StorageClass`. Each Loki pod and its PVCs reside in the same zone. When a zone failure occurs in a cluster, the StatefulSet controller will automatically attempt to recover the affected pods in the failed zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pods that are part of a link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/[StatefulSet], and they come with Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs) provisioned by a `StorageClass`. Each Loki pod and its PVCs reside in the same zone. When a zone failure occurs in a cluster, the StatefulSet controller will automatically attempt to recover the affected pods in the failed zone.
```

[WARNING]
====

> The following procedure will delete the PVCs in the failed zone, and all data contained therein.  To avoid complete data loss the replication factor field of the `LokiStack` CR should always be set to a value greater than 1 to ensure that Loki is replicating.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following procedure deletes the PVCs in the failed zone, and all data contained therein.  To avoid complete data loss, the replication factor field of the `LokiStack` CR should always be set to a value greater than 1 to ensure that Loki is replicating.
```

Reviewer 2: | To avoid complete data loss the replication factor field of the `LokiStack` CR should always be set to a value greater than 1 to ensure that Loki is replicating.

Should this be in the logging-loki-zone-aware-rep.adoc module, where you are creating the CR?

Author: No, the value for that field is set automatically when deployment size is selected and thus would not be less than 2 unless it had been manually changed. The warning is present here as a sort of "are you sure" check before the deletion of a PVC.

====

.Prerequisites
* Logging version 5.8 or later.
* Verify your `LokiStack` CR has a replication factor greater than 1.
* Zone failure detected by the control plane, and nodes in the failed zone are marked by cloud provider integration.

> While the StatefulSet controller will automatically attempt to reschedule pods in a failed zone, since the associated PVCs are also in the failed zone, automatic rescheduling to a different zone will not work. PVCs in the failed zone must be manually deleted to allow successful recreation of the stateful Loki Pod and its provisioned PVC in the new zone.

Reviewer 2: Per ISG, use _while_ and _since_ only referring to a period of time.  Also, per ISG do not use _recreate_.

```suggestion
The StatefulSet controller automatically attempts to reschedule pods in a failed zone. Because the associated PVCs are also in the failed zone, automatic rescheduling to a different zone does not work. You must manually delete the PVCs in the failed zone to allow successful re-creation of the stateful Loki Pod and its provisioned PVC in the new zone.
```

.Procedure

> . List the pods in `Pending` status:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. List the pods in `Pending` status:
+
```

[source,terminal]
----
oc get pods --field-selector status.phase==Pending -n openshift-logging
----
+
.Example `oc get pods` output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME                           READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE # <1>
logging-loki-index-gateway-1   0/1     Pending   0          17m
logging-loki-ingester-1        0/1     Pending   0          16m
logging-loki-ruler-1           0/1     Pending   0          16m
----
<1> These pods are in `Pending` status because their corresponding PVCs are in the failed zone.

> .. List the PVCs in `Pending` status:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. List the PVCs in `Pending` status:
+
```

[source,terminal]
----
oc get pvc -o=json -n openshift-logging | jq '.items[] | select(.status.phase == "Pending") | .metadata.name' -r
----
+
.Example `oc get pvc` output
[source,terminal]
----
storage-logging-loki-index-gateway-1
storage-logging-loki-ingester-1
wal-logging-loki-ingester-1
storage-logging-loki-ruler-1
wal-logging-loki-ruler-1
----

> .. Delete the PVC(s) for a pod:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. Delete the PVC(s) for a pod:
+
```

[source,terminal]
----
oc delete pvc __<pvc_name>__  -n openshift-logging
----

> .. Then delete the pod(s):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. Then delete the pod(s):
+
```

[source,terminal]
----
oc delete pod __<pod_name>__  -n openshift-logging
----

> Once these objects have been successfully deleted, they should automatically be recreated in an available zone.

Reviewer 2: | they should automatically be recreated in an available zone.

Should we stat ewhat process/feature does the re-creating, to make it really clear? As in: _ {preoduct-title} automatically re-creates the objects in an available zone._

> == Troubleshooting PVC in a terminating state

Reviewer 2: The heading needs an ID string.

> If the PVCs hang at terminating without deleting, it may be because PVC metadata finalizers are set to kubernetes.io/pv-protection. Removing the finalizers should allow the PVCs to delete successfully.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The PVCs might hang in the terminating state without being deleted, if PVC metadata finalizers are set to `kubernetes.io/pv-protection`. Removing the finalizers should allow the PVCs to delete successfully.
```
